Margin based campaigns in Google is a broken strategy
and I'm here to tell you why they don't
work and what you should do instead.
Margin based campaigns are still not only being
run in Google Ad accounts, but are still
being recommended by people, which just constantly surprises
me because the foundation for that type of
campaign structure is just full of holes.
Margin based campaigns is this thing where
you set up different Google shopping campaigns
or different PMAX campaigns for different groups
of products based on their margin.
It'll typically look something like this.
You have a high margin campaign targeting 300% ROAS, you
have a mid margin campaign targeting 500% ROAS, and you
have a low margin campaign targeting at 700% ROAS.
Whatever these targets are, it doesn't really matter.
But basically what we're trying to do here is
you're trying to bid high for high margin product
and thereby get a lot of volume, maximize revenue.
And for the lower margin products, you're basically
trying to protect them so they're not unprofitable.
Having all these products in the same
campaign is on paper really bad.
And it makes a lot of sense to break them
up because obviously you want to get, you want to
protect your lower margin products from not overspending.
Plus you want to get as much
out of your high margin products.
The problem is that it assumes the consumers buy
what they click on, which isn't the case.
I've done this analysis in many, many accounts and
every single time I review it, at least 3,50%
of consumers buy a completely different brand or completely
different category than the product that they clicked on.
The second problem is that the way that Google reports
on this, many assume that because Google show clicks and
conversions tied back to the individual product or item id,
then it's showing what people actually bought.
This is also wrong.
Google reports on what products were clicked on,
not the product that was actually bought.
Although you can expand your conversion tracking with cart
data and get all this information, it still doesn't
change my point of view on margin based campaigns.
The third problem is that
you're splitting up your data.
If you have a thousand conversions a month, then
it's not, it's not a super big deal.
But anything below a thousand conversions per
month and smart bidding starts underperforming.
Maybe it's not an issue for some of
your campaigns, but across all, across all three
margin based campaigns, it can be a problem.
Let's take this example for.
Let's take this as an example.
You have 1000 conversions in total.
You have 500 in your mid margin campaigns, you
have 350 in your high margin campaign, but you
only have 150 in your low margin campaign which
also has a pretty high roas target.
Suddenly smart bidding is having an awful lot
of trouble optimizing your low margin campaign.
With a high roas target and
only five conversions a day.
This results in a lower overall performance because again,
just splitting up all your data, some of your
campaigns will have very, very little data to work
based on and that can hu the performance.
So even though you are going from 1,000 conversions and
splitting those up, you might end up having those 150
conversions in your low margin campaign actually end up being
120 or 110 or not hitting the row start you
actually intended it to be just because the system has
less data to work with.
So what works best instead?
There's two ways to go about this.
One is consolidate campaigns into high and low
margin to retain as much data as possible.
You just need to acknowledge that you
can't 100% know what people buy.
But it's better than nothing.
If you truly have two different
categories like speakers and a couch.
And a couch you have 10%
margin and the speaker 50% margin.
You can kind of know that people are not going
to jump from one category to the other there.
But if it is that you have 10, 20, 30,
40, 50 different brands within one category and they all
have very different margins, then it's a very, very flawed
strategy to use a margin based campaign.
So the actual proper way to fix this
is to implement a gross profit tracking method.
Or it's also, you can also
say you're tracking contribution margin.
It depends like I say gross profit, while others
call it profit, some call it pos like profit
on ad spend, some call contribution margin.
It's kind of all the same thing.
What we're in essence what we're trying to do
is we're trying to track the gross profit from
a sale instead of revenue, which, which means that
you bypass the need to run margin based campaigns.
Each transaction tells Google exactly what margin
or contribution, contribution margin or gross profit
that's derived from that transaction.
So it knows that product A has a low
margin and product B has high margin which it
can use to set the bids accordingly because it
gets the data right from the get go.
If we take this example, then
gross profit is calculated like this.
So what we right now sending to Google is just revenue.
On the other hand, if we send in
profit or gross profit or contribution margin, then
we're sending in revenue minus Discounts minus cost
of goods sold, minus shipping costs, minor payment
cost, minus packaging and handling.
And this is such a monumentally better way
to implement a nuanced biz bidding method when
you have different margins for different products.
Profit based bidding like this allows
you to do several things.
One, it track what roas level
drives the highest profit in volume.
Instead of an arbitrary number like roas, it allows
smart bidding to bid higher for high margin products
and keywords, segments, devices and all that.
And it gives you insight to exactly
when you lose money on a sale.
We in savvy use this to know how
low we can actually go for an upper
funnel keyword before we start actually losing money.
It helps drive a ton of
growth when implemented the right way.
So to compare this the right way, the things that
I say is the right way at least is profit
based bidding tracks what actually happens in a transaction.
It also tracks how many products are in there.
It tracks if you have a high margin, low margin
product in the same cart, et cetera, et cetera.
And the wrong way today as I believe it is,
the margin based campaigns track what people click on, but
it doesn't show what people actually end up buying.
So you don't get the effect
you're actually trying to get.
So the problems that I have with profit tracking or contribution margin
tracking is that when you run a sale like 10% off, 20%
off, 30% off, the changes in data can hurt a lot in
terms of how smart bidding works because all of a sudden it's
used to saying, let's say you get $100 in value, all of
a sudden it gets 80 or 70.
So in essence the ROAS that it works based
off just drops from one day to another.
And doesn't know why that's a problem because like during
a sale we actually wanted to drive more volume.
So that can really be a challenge.
Now there's ways to get around this.
Conversion rate goes up during a sale, so
all of a sudden it performs better.
But for some businesses that run a lot of
sales, this is a really big issue because smart
bidding doesn't have this stable data anymore.
The second thing is that very low margin
businesses might have so little data that it
becomes really hard to work with.
Smart bidd.
So if you consistently run at 120% profit on Aspen
or POAS or ROAS, target changing to from 120 to
115 or 110, it's basically cutting your profit in half.
But Google Ads have like it's such a Small
change for Google Ads going from 120% to 110%.
So it can really be tough to
work with smart baming at that level.
It can also for some people I found it now
that they can see the profit from every sale, then
they start being way too focused on profitability and like
every single day or week where they're not hitting a
certain profit level in a Google Ads account, then they
just, they just, they just go crazy.
They, they just, they decrease bids, decrease bids to
try to be more profitable and their volume goes
down and it just hurts everything here. It's, it's.
You need to also use something like a blended
roas, new customers or any other data point.
Also I would like to say if you
have the same margin on all products, unnecessary.
If you have the same margin on like 90% of your
revenue, it still doesn't matter to do any of these things.
It's just unnecessary to do.
Last thing I wanted to mention is Google has a profit
based betting in beta at the moment and it should come
out during the early days of the early months of 2025.
But it opens three issues.
You can't troubleshoot it like you can yourself
or with an A software like Profit Metrics.
If I put on my tinfoil hat, then you
also give Google your cogs and exact margins.
This is a tinfoil hat theory.
But I'm very worried about what
that can do to your auction.
If Google knows exactly how hard to squeeze you
and it doesn't account for things like shipping and
handling, they're minor things in the bigger picture.
But for some businesses it's important to
calculate that as part of their profitability.
So to summarize before we go to actions from here,
what consumers click on does not equal what they end
up buying or adding to the cart alongside the product.
Splitting your data into multiple campaigns
is not ideal for smart bidding.
Only a lot of data can allow this to work.
So that's why margin based campaigns can actually
hurt your performance better than improving it.
Profit based bidding with a software like something
like Profit Metrics gives smart bidding much better
data to bid directly on profit which can
open up for much better performance.
Profit based bidding is not just applicable to
shopping, but works well with shopping as well,
which everybody seems to ignore in this thing.
So if we put up a margin based campaign for
shopping, why don't we do the same thing for search?
Why don't we do set different targets for them?
Most people just ignore that and you avoid
all of this margin based campaign structure which
opens the door to create a more sophisticated
campaign structure in shopping on pmax.
Because if you're splitting if you're already splitting your
shopping campaigns in margins then splitting them again and
you're really splitting your data too much.
So you can't that you usually just have
one shot to split your shopping campaigns.
So by using that one shot you have for margins
is just not the best way to get better performance.
So based on this, if you have a lot
of different brands, a lot of different categories with
different margins, I highly, highly recommend to look at
profit metrics or custom code profit tracking yourself.
It is doable.
Profit metrics skips all that.
Second thing, implement it into your account.
I have another video on how
to actually implement profit based bidding.
And the third, try to try to
play around with the with the targets.
Just make sure you use something like blended roas
or you look at new customer acquisition data or
something else as a secondary data point.
Again, don't just look at your
numbers in your Google Ads account.
That was it for me.
I hope you loved it.
Remember to subscribe for more tips and that way
you get the new one whenever it comes out.